so this new segment is about morphology
lexicon so when people learn new words
they store them in what is known in
linguistics and psychology as the mental
lexicon it is used to store the meaning
the pronunciation and the part of speech
among other things so if I tell you to
store a word like cat you will know that
this is a little furry creature that
says meow
you know that it's pronounced cat as in
cool art too and you know that it's
enough sometimes you may not know all of
this information and yet still be able
to store this information in the mental
lexicon for example if you see the word
work for the first time you may not know
what it's part of speech is you can
probably figure out its pronunciation
and you probably don't know what its
meaning is but if I told you that work
is a noun and it means a small creature
you can use it in a sentence because you
would know the part of speech of the
meaning you can say for example things
like I saw a work today or a work walked
by similarly a word like lluvias even if
you don't know its meaning you may be
able to infer some information about it
because most words in English that have
this form adjectives you can even reason
about the words that you haven't seen
before you can compare traffic for and
traffic less and figure out that they're
most likely opposites because there are
many pairs of words in English that have
those particular endings and have Antoni
me relationship so one of the things
that we're interested in today is how to
interpret those words morphologically so
if you take a word like clue vyas can
you figure out what its ending is and
why you think that it is an adjective so
people have intuition they have a
grammar that they are born with that
helps them understand words that they
have not seen before and they can also
have this property called productivity
which allows them to create new words
and have them mean different things
let's look now at some of the words that
you store in your mental lexicon who
would like to runs clearly it has two
possible meanings in English in one of
the cases it is a noun plural and in the
second case it is a verb in third-person
singular so clear
it's part of speech changes its meaning
changes its pronunciation doesn't seem
to change in this particular case but it
is ambiguous
so there are has to be a way for people
to store ambiguous words in their mental
lexicon and disambiguate them on the fly
when they pronounce or read sentences
there are also some special cases of
words that are stored as what is known
as our mores for example Katz is a
derivative of cat
it means the plural of a singular cat
but there are some special cases like
oxen which is formed irregularly as a
plural of ox the past tense of play is
played but one of the past tenses of
swing is swung which is again formed
irregularly so those words have to be
stored in the lexicon somehow and they
may not be obtainable directly by
following some morphological derivation
like cats so words have a lot of a fixes
they include things like prefixes that
go in front of the stem suffixes endings
and so on so one of the subjects of
morphology is called derivational
morphology it has to do with
understanding how different forms of
words are created from other words by
adding different affixes so if we look
at the word drinkable we can say that
the whole word drink a boys are
adjectives you remember that JJ is the
standard label in natural language
processing for adjectives we also know
the Dinka bow is formed by converting
the verb drink into an adjective by
adding the suffix abel so we can present
the whole word drinkable and some sort
of a tree which has V the verb drink
first
the suffix Abel and then those two words
combined form the new word drinkable so
there are many cases in English where we
have suffixes that change the part of
speech of a word so ER is one such
example so for example to sleep is a
verb and sleeper which has multiple
meanings is a noun derived from sleep by
adding the suffix ER so we can in many
cases infer the meaning of some of the
morphine's for example the morpheme Abel
means que
of doing the verb the suffix ER may be a
person who does a certain activity so
let's try this with a few of those
morphemes
so Ness for example is used to form
nouns for example we can have sleepy
which is a magic t'v sleepiness is a
noun that is derived from sleepy so the
affix Ness turns an adjective into a
noun a bow we already saw can turn a
verb into an adjective and then we can
also similarly consider the meaning of
some other prefixes and suffixes that
just ing re for example is usually used
at the beginning of a word it means to
repeat something un means negation for
example do an undo and finally ER for
adjectives means the comparative form of
the adjective so in the example that I
showed you we can draw a diagram that
tells us that the JJ is transformed into
a sequence of a verb followed by the
suffix Abel and it turns out that
morphemic rules can be used recursively
so a long word like unconcerned deadness
says is really fond from concerned by
adding first the SAVAK CD then another
suffix Ness and then negating it and
finally adding an extra es at the end
for plural so in some cases it's very
easy to look at complicated the word and
figure out how it was derived but in
other cases we may have ambiguities for
example the word and Lobo as you will
see on the next slide can have two
different morphological interpretations
whereas a word like unbelievable we only
have one can you think why this is the
case so let's look at the examples on
the previous slide undoable
this can be formed as unable to be done
so sublet is undoable or it can is
something that is able to be undone in
this case it will be analyzes and do a
bone now this doesn't apply to
unbelievable because one of the
interpretation is
same as for under Bo it's something that
is unable to be believed but the second
interpretation able to be unbeliev
sons very unnatural so in this case we
don't have any ambiguity let's look now
at some morphological examples in
different languages we can have rules
that are not as simple as the ones that
we have in English just adding an S for
plural for example so in the language
pangasinan we can have a duplication of
some of the morphemes so amigo is
friends I'm amigo is the plural for
friends in this case we have a
reduplication of a morpheme in the
middle of the world
similarly in some on the word Zavala
means heat travels Sava Valley is the
plural for they travel we can have
certain fixes for example in German the
word spilling is the infinitive of the
verb to play and gish pealed is the past
form for it so in this case we have a
certain fix because part of the morphine
goes to the beginning of the word the
gay part and part goes at the end in
this case to t4 we can even look at some
artificial phenomenon for example a
language that kids are familiar with
this pig latin in pig latin you take the
first syllable of the word and you move
it at the end so from happy you get
something like a pee hey and there are
some other fun languages like this in
other countries for example vellum which
is a french slang language the word
Valen comes from long there which in
French means in Reverse so if you
reverse the syllables of law where you
get very long and it includes words like
say frog which is the verlande form for
France a by switching the two syllables
as well as a hit Pooh which is the
switched version of pookie which means a
cook now let me give you an example in
English you may have heard this
expression where are you going I'm going
to Massa freaking chooses you can insert
a phrase like this in the middle of some
words but you cannot just insert it
randomly for example if you had
Massachusetts you wouldn't be able to
say my freakin such you
or massachu freaking sets so clearly
freaking cannot be inserted in any
random place where would you insert it
for example in the word education could
you say it UK freaking shun that doesn't
sound natural but you can probably say
ed you freaking keishon so the rule is
actually that the freaking in fix is
inserted to the left of the syllable
that bears the main stress so as I said
earlier you can say that you freaking
keishon but you cannot say ed euchre
freaking shun or e freaking education
and there are some exceptions but this
will applies in most cases so as I
mentioned before the morphemes of a word
are individual units of morphological
meaning they include the stems and the
affixes of the word suffixes are
prefixes suffixes and endings there are
some languages that have concatenated
morphology like English for example
where the effect is added to the
beginning or to the end of the word but
there are also cases of temp lattic
morphology as well so for example in
semitic languages here's an example from
hebrew that in the template for learn is
our md it's just a sequence of three
consonants but if we want to conjugate
it or inflected we can get different
forms of learn for example a mob which
is he studied limb ed which is he taught
and Lumad which means he was taught so
by inserting vowels different sets of
vowels in different places we can modify
the council on template and form
different words now let's look at
inflectional morphology which is one of
the main areas of morphology words can
have different inflections based on
tense such as present past and future
number first and second and third for
example I you or he or she person in
English that singular employer but other
languages have other persons for example
duo which is used for two people mood
things like indicative subjunctive
conditional aspects for example
progressive and perfected English words
have at most five verb forms
for example the verb to be as am are was
were and then there how many however
forty different forms in French there
are six cases in Russian you can look at
the website listed here for some
examples and there could be as many as
forty thousand forms of the same word in
Turkish for example they can be a
special form that means you can cause X
to cause Y to dot dot dot to do Z so you
can have a recursive set of rules that
create really long words morphological
analysis and is an area of natural
language processing that takes a word
and converts it into morphological
representation this is related to
stemming but it does more than just stem
the word it also gives you the power of
speech and any morphological information
associated with the word so for example
the wood sleeps is translated as the
infinitive sleep then a label for verb a
label for third-person and the label for
singular the word done is translated as
the infinitive for the verb do followed
by a label for the verb V and PP which
in this case stands for past participle
now let me show you some interesting
phenomena that are related to morphology
in different languages so the first one
is an example of Turkish vowel harmony
as I mentioned before our vowels can be
grouped into front and back and high and
low in English this is a very common
distinction between vowels in Turkish
there is an additional distinction
between around in and around rounded
vowels so every time you have a vowel
that is formed by putting your mouth in
a rounded position you can round your
lips like this and change the sound to a
different vowel so for example e e so in
Turkish there 8 vowels in total which
form all the possible combinations of
front and back high and low and
unrounded and rounded vowels so the back
vowels are formed in the back of the
mouth and the
Bowser formed in the front of the mouth
so involve harmony we have a principle
that says that within the same word you
can only have back vowels or only have
form VARs there are other languages that
have this property in addition to
Turkish for example Hungarian so let's
look at an example
so the suffix da or de in Turkish is
used to indicate location in on or act
but we use da if the rest of the vowels
in the word are back vowels and we used
a if the rest of the vowels in the word
are front vowels so let's look at the
examples here in the room is or dot docx
because the word o da which means room
has only back vowels and therefore we
add dot at the end which is another back
power couple is door couple da is at the
door and now we have the examples with
form VARs F is home at home is F day
girl is Lake girl day is at the lake and
finally could blue is bridge and could
be day is on the bridge in fact I want
to point you to our natural problem that
talks about turkeys vowel harmony and
some other interesting phenomenon you
can access it from this website and then
when you're done solving it you can look
at the solution which is available here
so let's look at another example from
Turkish which shows you how complicated
morphology can be in different languages
so this is a slide courtesy of from
Kemal a philosopher from Qatar he shows
how one can take an English sentence and
entire sentence and convert it to a
single English word by following the
morphological rules of Turkish so here's
the word in Turkish it's the one listed
at the bottom and it means if we will be
able to make something
dot-dot-dot become strong so in the
first step we start with that sentence
and then we label in different colors
the different modifications to
strong for example the future tens will
the possibility be able and the property
of becoming something so then we reorder
those labels to get them in the order
they have to be in Turkish so strong is
their stem and then all of the other
pieces form morphological inflections so
become is the first that's as lush and
then to make something it's to be able
is a bill will is a check if is saying
and finally we goes to the very end and
that is the final affixed coup which
gives us this long words at the bottom
and here's that example from Japanese
which shows you how Japanese have
imported a lot of words from English and
they use katakana which is one of the
main alphabets in Japanese to represent
different sounds and different
morphological combinations that come
from English so for example right in the
middle of the slide we have cocci which
stands for coffee so you see that the F
sound was changed to her and we have
those macarons or bars on top of the two
vowels to indicate that both syllables
are long syllables and let's look at one
more example we have for example of a
suit or on which stands for restaurant
and the reason why the second syllable
has a vowel in it restaurant is because
in Japanese grammar the only kinds of
syllables that are allowed are the ones
that end in a vowel with only one
exception the syllables that end in
vowel by the letter n so that's why we
have to serve this in the middle of
restaurant so now we're going to move on
to some other levels of linguistic
analysis we looked at morphology let's
see what comes next so one of the other
levels is semantics so semantics is the
study of the meaning of words and
sentences and it can be split into
lexical semantics and compositional
semantics so Mexico semantics
to do with the meaning of individual
words and the relationships between the
meanings of pairs of words so that
includes specific lexical relationships
such as synonyms but also hyper names
and hypo names which are special terms
for more general and more specific
concepts antonyms and so on we're going
to look at those in more detail in one
of the future lectures so lexical
semantics also are deals with the senses
of words for example some words that
have multiple senses are known as
polysemous words it also talks about
collocations so collocation is a
sequence of words that appear together
more frequently than what you would
expect if you just combined the
probabilities of the individual word so
for example stock market it appears more
frequently than stock and market
multiplied by each other we also have
idioms those are specific collocations
that have a meaning that is not
literally inferable from the components
of example to kick the bucket is an
expression in English it means to die so
obvious it doesn't mean to kick any
particular bucket so in addition to
lexical semantics we have also
compositional semantics which deals with
understanding the meaning of a sentence
based on the meaning of its components
we will talk about lexical semantics and
compositional semantics later the next
level of study in linguistics is called
pragmatics and that is the study of how
knowledge about the world and language
conventions interact with literal
meaning it covers things like speech
acts resolution of anaphoric relations
for example pronouns and it covers the
modeling of speech acts in dialogue so
later this semester we're going to look
at pragmatics in more detail and there
are many other areas of linguistics
which are not directly related to
natural language processing so we'll
just list them here very briefly social
linguistics which is the interaction of
social organization and language
historical linguistics which studies the
change of languages over time linguistic
typology that looks at how languages are
related to each other and have common
properties language acquisition of first
and second language and finally psycho
linguistics which is the study of how
people produce and perceive language in
real time